---
layout: post
title: Running New Relic's Ignite Program
---

My name is John Hyland (they/them), and as of this writing, I have been running
the Ignite program at New Relic for nearly five years. Ignite is our early
career engineering incubator program, and this article walks through all the
details of how it operates, from start to finish. It is intended primarily as a
resource for those who are running (or planning to run) similar programs. Of
course, it may also be interesting to folks thinking of applying to the
program! Itâ€™s organized into sections matching the phases each Ignite engineer
will go through: hiring, onboarding, team rotations, placement, team
onboarding, and follow up.

# Before You Start

## Take Notes

Before you do anything else, I recommend creating a document for recording
notes, observations, and feedback about how the program is going. It's
particularly valuable to track anything that didn't work well, anything that
worked _really_ well, or any time you think of ways to improve. That way, when
you periodically look back to iterate on the program, you'll have a list of
things to change or adjust going forward.

## The Job Description

There's a lot of great advice out there about writing inclusive job
descriptions, so I won't repeat it here. Make sure that you do some reading on
that topic, though, and consider using automated tools to review the text. You
can check out New Relic's ASE job description to see what we came up with.

## Work with Talent Acquisition

Make sure you go over the full process with your Talent Acquisition team (or
Recruiting, or whatever your office calls this group). They'll be the first
point of contact with your candidates, and will be setting up interview
schedules and such. They need to be able to explain the process, get the right
people in the right interviews, and so on.

## Set Up an Interview Panel

Speaking of interviews, since there's no specific existing team being hired
into, there's no automatic group of folks to do the interviewing. For each
round of Ignite hiring, we set up a group of engineers and managers to both
evaluate take-home exercises and conduct in-person interviews. You could call
for volunteers, draw from the teams being considered for placement, hand-pick a
specific panel, or otherwise handle this in whatever way seems best for your
organization. Make sure you have all the necessary skills represented in your
panel (see below for the various sorts of interview sessions we conduct). Once
you have your full set of interviewers, it's good to let them know about how
many interviews they should expect, over what period of time. We usually aim
for about 3 interviews per interviewer plus 1 training session, over a period
of around 3 weeks, so the burden on any individual is fairly light. It'll
depend on how many applicants you have and how many interviewers for each type
of interview session, though. You can start doing this around the time the
position becomes available for applications -- it'll take a little time for
candidates to get to the interview phase.

# Hiring

Hiring for an early career role is significantly different than hiring for a
more senior position. For mid- to lead- level roles, the challenge is finding
qualified candidates. You can do a lot of pre-sorting based on resumes to see
if they have the needed experience, and you'll likely end up with only a
handful of folks (at most) that you'd consider bringing in for a final
interview. The "best of the best" are almost never on the job market, so
working connections and active recruiting are critical. For early career roles,
almost everybody at that level is on the job market, and there are far, far
more candidates coming up through universities, code schools, and other
backgrounds eager for their first engineering job than there are positions to
go around. Sifting through applications is like drinking from a firehose, and
the challenge is processing the sheer volume of candidates and narrowing it
down to the most promising folks. Every time we open a round of hiring for
Ignite, the volume of applicants goes up -- as of this writing, it's about 100
per day.

When designing the Ignite hiring process, the specific traits we want to select
for are:

  * **Basic coding skills.** Candidates should be able to produce working,
    tested code from scratch at at least a basic level.
  * **Communication skills (written and verbal).** These are critical to
    long-term success as a software engineer, but often underemphasized in many
    hiring processes.
  * **Empathy and teamwork.** Research shows that the most productive teams are
    those with psychological safety and mutual respect.

In addition, there were a number of principles we strove to incorporate into the process:

  * Bring in as diverse a candidate pool as possible.
  * As much as feasible, create objective standards and minimize bias.
  * Minimize the stress and anxiety of the interview process and provide a
    positive candidate experience.
  * Respect candidates' time and minimize the amount of "take-home" work involved.
  * Provide actionable feedback to all candidates.

Some of the measures we took toward those goals include:
  * All active recruiting for the Ignite program occurs with organizations
    centered around underrepresented groups. (Everybody is welcome to apply,
    but this is where we focus our active recruiting efforts.)
  * People of all backgrounds are encouraged to apply, including college
    graduates, bootcamp graduates, or folks who are self-taught or come from
    nontraditional backgrounds. Ideally, we'd love to see a mix of all of these
    in the program.
  * We use what we call a "progressive take-home exercise." The initial
    take-home exercise is simple enough for an early career engineer to
    complete in about an hour, and the final coding interview adds a feature to
    the originally submitted code.
  * We allow a choice of multiple take-home exercises, and also a variety of
    additional features to add, so that each candidate can choose the type of
    work that will best showcase their own strengths and experience.
  * Take-home exercises are anonymized, so the evaluator does not know whose
    exercise they are evaluating.
  * We publish all of our behavioral interview questions publicly and
    specifically share them with all candidates ahead of time.
  * Each step in the interview process has a defined evaluation rubric with
    specific criteria and a scoring guide. Feedback to the hiring manager is
    done by filling out the feedback form.
  * After review by the manager, all feedback forms are provided to the
    candidate, whether they continue through the process or not, so that they
    can see exactly where they missed the mark and what to work on for next
    time.
  * Before conducting any interviews, all interviewers receive training on how
    to conduct the interview and what sort of feedback to leave in the form.
    For example, if a candidate did not do well in a particular area, the
    interviewer should suggest ways that area could have been improved in the
    feedback form, rather than just marking it as poorly done. They also
    receive written guidebooks covering the same material.

Ignite's overall hiring process is structured as a funnel, like many others. At
each step throughout the funnel, we're looking to filter out about 50-70% of
remaining candidates, in order to arrive at a manageable number of finalists by
the end. We want to move segments that take a lot of time to evaluate or for
candidates to complete later in the process, and front load the less time
intensive exercises, both to keep our workload reasonable and to respect
candidates' time. As such, we've settled on the following steps for the Ignite
interview process.

  * Application
  * Hiring Manager Screen
  * Take Home Exercise
  * Final Interview

This has worked for us so far, but as the number of applicants keeps growing,
we may find we need to add additional steps early in the process or become much
more strict in our evaluations at some point, in order to maintain a manageable
volume of candidates in the later (more time intensive) phases of the process.

# Application

The initial application consists of a resume, an optional cover letter, and a
short answer question.

## Resume

In the Ignite program, it's usually the candidate's first engineering job, and
we're specifically looking for candidates from diverse backgrounds. As such, we
don't weigh resumes as highly for Ignite positions as we might for more senior
roles. That said, there are a few things that will make a resume stand out for
us, such as signs of completed software projects, or job experience in other
fields that might be relevant or valuable in software engineering. For example,
teaching experience is a good sign, anything with math or especially statistics
is very good, and any programming-adjacent work such as design or product
management is also a plus. None of these things are necessary, though.

## Cover Letter

Having a cover letter is not required (at all), but we'll read it if it's
there. Since cover letters take time for the candidate to write, and time for
us to read and evaluate, we suggest candidates only include one if there's
something specific they really want to tell us that can't be said elsewhere in
the application. A great cover letter is a small plus, but a generic one is
neutral at best, and a poorly written cover letter can be a significant
negative. So, most Ignite applications would probably be better off leaving it
out. That said, candidates should be aware that opinions about cover letters
vary widely -- for some roles, hiring managers strongly prefer they be
included.

## Short Answer Question

Answers should be three paragraphs at most -- a concise style is one of the
specific things we're looking for. We only ask one short answer question in our
application form:

> "Tell us about a technical project youâ€™ve worked on. Explain the details of
> how it worked, and describe at least one trade-off you considered. Please
> keep your response to no more than 2-3 paragraphs."

With this question, we want to see that candidates can take complex ideas and
break them down clearly in a way that non-experts could understand. After
reading the project description, a reviewer should come away knowing what was
built, why it was built that way, and roughly what all the moving pieces were.
Also, the project described should be technical in some sense, but need not be
a software project -- building a camera or some other complicated project would
also be fine, as long as there's some technical depth to the topic. Perfect
grammar and punctuation aren't required, but the ability to clearly express
complex ideas is.

In particular, the directions ask for trade-offs, so we want to see at least
one trade-off described. An application that does not include any trade-offs is
unlikely to proceed. A trade-off should have at least two plausible choices
with pluses and minuses on both sides. "We didn't have time for everything, so
we focused on X" is not a trade-off, because having infinite time is not an
option. "We only had time to implement either feature X or feature Y. We went
with X because [reasons]" is an ok trade-off description, but not great. A
great description of a trade-off might look something like this: "We had to
choose option X or option Y. X is better at [things], but Y is better for
[other things]. [Something] was the most important consideration for us,
because [reasons], so we went with X." This could be about architectural
styles, libraries, databases, or any other decision that had multiple
reasonable options that the candidate had to choose between. Experienced
engineers are almost always thinking about trade-offs like this as they design
and build their systems.

## Hiring Manager Screen

The Hiring Manager Screen consists of a light technical exercise and an
opportunity for the candidate to ask any questions they may have about the
program. The technical exercise will be on about a FizzBuzz level of
difficulty, but it won't actually be FizzBuzz. Candidates have 15 minutes, can
write their solution in any IDE and any language they like, and are free to use
Google or look up API documentation (though we do ask that they don't look up
the exact literal solution to the exercise).

If a candidate is not able to complete the technical screen, or if there are
any behavioral red flags, we explain to them why they will not be continuing
through the interview process and thank them for their time.

If a candidate successfully completes the exercise and will be continuing, then
we'll walk through what the rest of the interview process will look like and
what kind of timeline to expect. If applicable, we let them know that since we
do anonymized batches of code evaluations, we may need to wait for a full batch
to come in before evaluating their submission, so to expect some delay before
hearing back.

As a side note, this is probably one of the most stressful steps for
candidates, and I would love to avoid it if possible. However, for early career
engineers coming into their first programming job, we've found that we _must_
test for the fundamental building blocks of programming, such as loops,
conditionals, and the most basic data structures like lists and maps.
Understandably, it's very difficult for a new engineer to judge whether their
technical skills are ready for that next step into a professional position, and
many candidates need a bit more time to firmly establish those building blocks
when they first apply. While we were initially more lenient with this
interview, the later technical elements of the hiring process are more
challenging, and what we have found over the years is that if a candidate
struggles at this step, those struggles will increase going forward. It is not
a kindness to put somebody in a position where they will not be successful, so
I recommend being clear about what is required to advance and firm in those
requirements.

## Take-Home Exercise

We specifically want a diverse set of backgrounds, and unlike most programming
jobs, there is no specific type or style of code that we will be focusing on in
this role. So, in the Ignite program we offer two different choices of
exercise, so that candidates can choose the one that will best showcase their
specific experience and strengths. One of the exercises focuses on React and
CSS, and the other is a small command line tool.

All exercises are evaluated based on a strict rubric with very specific
criteria, and the broad outline of those criteria are described in the text of
the exercise.

Exercises are also evaluated anonymously, so evaluators have no identifying
information about the candidate when they review the code. We have two ways to
handle anonymization, depending on the situation. Ideally, have one person
anonymize each entry, and have somebody else do the evaluation. That way, you
can evaluate each submission as it comes in. It's also possible for one person
to handle everything themselves by collecting batches of 3-5, anonymizing them,
and then doing all the evaluations. You'll need a way to anonymize and
deanonymize the submissions in that case - we use a small commandline script
for this purpose.

## Final Interview

### Interviewer Preparation and Logistics

We have a training/kickoff meeting with all the interviewers before anybody
starts interviewing. In brief, these are the areas we cover:

  * Our overall hiring philosophy, as described in the "Hiring" section above.
  * Legal restrictions around topics that may not be discussed or asked about.
  * Walk through the interview process and the feedback forms.
  * Remind everybody to be kind and thoughtful -- interviewing is very stressful, and this may be some candidates' first job interviews.

In addition to the initial training, we also send out an email to each
interviewer the day before they interview, which will contain links to the
Interviewer Guidebook and the feedback form for that specific candidate. The
feedback form is a Google Docs spreadsheet with one page for each interviewer,
plus a page with instructions and a scoring guide.

We always aim to have two interviewers in each session, if possible - one
primary and one observer. The observer will mostly just be observing, but if
there's something they really want to say, or if the candidate wants to ask
them a question, that's ok. Interviewers should generally observe at least a
couple times before being primary for any given type of session. We also try to
have at least one interviewer in each session who identifies as a member of an
underrepresented group (as optionally indicated in our interviewer signup
form).

After all the interviewers have submitted their feedback for a candidate, the
hiring manager reviews all the feedback left and ensures it is appropriate to
share with the candidate. In other words, all of the written comments are kind,
any areas to improve are clearly spelled out, no proprietary information is
included, etc. The feedback form is then sent back to the candidate, and we let
them know if they will be considered in our final selection. If they are, we
let them know the expected timeline for the final decision.

### Interview Sessions

We want to respect the candidate's time, as well as our interviewers', so the
final interview stage consists of three 45 minute sessions with a 15 minute
break between each one. Each of these sessions is described below.

#### Technical Session

Similarly to the code challenge, we want to mitigate the stress of interviewing
as much as possible, and give our candidates as much opportunity to shine as we
can. So, for the technical interview, we start with the code they've already
submitted, since it's guaranteed to be a domain and codebase they're familiar
with. We also let them choose from several different features to implement, and
allow them to look up whatever they like online (aside from the literal exact
solution to the exercise).

#### Behavioral Session

This is a behavioral interview with "Tell me about a time whenâ€¦" style
questions. We worked with our ERGs to develop the specific questions, but
they're mostly fairly typical of this style of interview.

We provide the full text of the questions to all candidates - in fact, they're
published on our website. To some extent, like many of our practices, this is
to mitigate the stress of interviewing. However, we've also found that this
provides a better hiring signal for any given candidate. Typically, folks have
a handful of stories they always tell in response to these kinds of questions,
and the third or fourth time they tell that story is always way more polished
than the first time. We don't want to select for whether they happen to have
already been asked a similar question a couple times in the past, and we don't
want to know about just whatever example they could come up with under pressure
in the heat of the moment. We want to know their best example of a given
behavior, described as well as they can describe it, and publishing the
questions ahead of time helps us achieve that.

#### Verbal Communication Session

We provide the following prompt to the candidate ahead of time, so that they
have a chance to think about what topic they'd like to explain and practice
walking through it if they like:

> "Please explain a technical topic of your choice. It doesn't necessarily need
> to be about computers, but computer related topics are often a good choice.
> What we're specifically looking for is your ability to take complex abstract
> concepts, break them down, and explain them clearly. You're welcome to use
> informal visual aids if you like, but please do not have any prepared slides
> or materials ahead of time. When we used to do these in person, we encouraged
> folks to use a whiteboard, and you're welcome to use anything that's
> basically equivalent, though it's also fine if you'd prefer not to have any
> visuals. This will be a very informal, conversational session, so expect that
> there will be some back and forth as we stop and ask questions and such. To
> get an idea of the format, imagine that somebody has just joined your team
> and you need to explain a system your team owns, or perhaps an executive has
> asked you to explain some concept to them."

If possible, we find it very valuable to have the hiring manager personally
conduct all of the Verbal Communication interview sections. While we do have a
scoring rubric that aims to be as objective as possible, this session has a
higher degree of subjectivity than most. Having one person conduct all the
interviews helps to create a more consistent set of evaluations across
candidates.

## Final Selection

To make the final selection, the hiring manager schedules a meeting with the
recruiters, any interviewers who are interested in attending, and any other
parties we feel should be involved.

Ahead of time, they prepare a spreadsheet
of the candidates in a suggested stacked rank order, including summaries of
their feedback at each step and any additional comments or observations that
seem relevant. Generally, the ordering should follow the scoring from the
interviews, but there are reasons why you might choose to deviate from that.
For example, perhaps a candidate scored well but had behavioral red flags, or
perhaps they didn't score quite as well as another candidate, but had relevant
non-programming job experience that the other candidate lacked and were thus
ranked higher.

At the meeting, the manager lays out the reasoning for their
ordering, and asks for feedback or other impressions. Based on feedback, they
adjust the ordering as appropriate. At the end of the meeting, the selection is
fixed, and the top candidates are informed that they have been accepted to the
program. If some of them end up accepting other offers or are otherwise no
longer available, we'll reach out to the next person on the list. Once we have
enough accepted offers to fill out a cohort, then we inform the other finalists
that, though it was a close decision, they have not been selected.

Even for folks who don't make it into the program, though, that's not
necessarily the end of our interactions with those candidates. For one thing,
anybody is welcome to apply again, regardless of how far they got on their
first try. Also, anybody who makes it to the final selection is somebody we
think is exceptional. If a candidate is interested, then as we see other roles
throughout the company that we think they may be a good fit for, we'll reach
out to those managers to let them know that that candidate did well in the
Ignite interviews.

# Onboarding Phase

Once a new group of Ignite engineers start, there is a two week onboarding
period for them to learn the basics of interacting with New Relic's systems and
teams. We cover things like Git, JIRA, standups, code reviews, retros, and so
on. This is also when the new cohort goes through our engineering-wide
onboarding process.

## Kickoff

During the first or second day (depending on the various paperwork and other
administrative tasks when folks join the company), we have a kickoff meeting
with the new group. The purpose of this meeting is to introduce everybody, lay
out the timeline and expectations for the Ignite program, and to start building
a rapport with the new engineers and establishing an environment of
psychological safety.

## Working Agreements

After the kickoff, we'll have a session with all current Ignite engineers (both
the new group and anybody still in the program from the previous group) to
establish our working agreements. There is one nonnegotiable agreement, which
is "We will be respectful and considerate of one another," but we'll also
establish agreements around hours, collaboration, meeting conventions, and so
on. This is a very collaborative process, and while there are prompts for
specific areas that need to be agreed on, folks are also encouraged to bring
their own suggestions to cover anything that is important to create a
productive and welcoming work environment for them.

## Sample Project

The rest of the onboarding time is spent working on a sample project. We'll
build a few different versions of the project that each interact with New
Relic's systems in different ways. For instance, one version will be a pure
JavaScript application using the New Relic One platform, another will be a full
service with an integrated frontend and backend, and so on. One goal of this is
to gain some basic familiarity with our hosting infrastructure, build and
deploy pipelines, and internal APIs. We also want our new engineers to learn
some of the basics of interacting with code as a software engineer, such as how
to scope pull requests, how to do effective code review, trying out solo,
pairing, and party programming, and just generally to see what it's like to
collaborate on a team day-to-day.

## Assigning Generalist Mentors

During this period, we also find mentors for all of our Ignite engineers. Since
part of the purpose of Ignite is to try a lot of different kinds of software
engineering before selecting a long term team, we don't try to focus on any
particular technology with these mentors. (That's why we call them "generalist"
mentors.) Instead, a generalist mentor is somebody who will be a mentor for
generally succeeding as an early career software engineer at New Relic. They
can often answer questions about processes or particular challenges faced,
provide an additional perspective beyond the Ignite manager's own life at New
Relic, or act as a sounding board. They're also a source of guidance for any
issues that may come up regarding interactions with the Ignite manager
themself.

Folks with similar backgrounds are often best for this role. So, early to mid
career engineers are good, and if the ASE is a member of an underrepresented
group, somebody who is also a member of a similar group can be helpful.
Previous Ignite engineers make great generalist mentors! We try to assign each
new ASE a generalist mentor in their first week.

To find potential generalist mentors, it helps to keep a list ahead of time of
everybody you've come across that mentioned being interested in mentoring. If
you don't already have a list, broadcasting in your company's slack channels
(or equivalent) asking for folks who are interested in being Ignite mentors can
be a good way to seed one.

Once you've identified a possible match, contact the potential mentor's manager
before doing anything else. Make sure that they agree it would be a good match,
and fits into that person's current schedule and workload. The expected time
commitment is about half an hour a week, or an hour every other week.

Then reach out to the potential mentor and see if they're interested. Explain
the generalist mentor role and the rough expectations, and offer to set up an
introduction with the mentee so the two can meet and see if it's a good fit.

If all involved parties are interested, then set up the introduction using a
standard email template. This introduces the potential mentor and mentee to
each other and lays out some guidelines and advice for a successful mentoring
relationship. If, after meeting, the Ignite engineer and potential mentor
decide not to move forward with the mentorship for any reason, that's totally
fine, and we're happy to find an alternate mentor.

# Team Rotation Phase

After onboarding, we enter into the team rotation phase, which will compose the
bulk of an engineer's time in the Ignite program. During this phase, the cohort
works with a variety of teams throughout the company in two week engagements,
makes social connections with engineers and managers throughout the
organization, and has specialized classes and learning opportunities for
various technologies and systems in common use.

## Rotations

During a rotation, the full Ignite cohort works with another team to accomplish
some goal. We've found that two weeks is about the right amount of time for a
rotation. One week usually isn't enough time to get up to speed and finish
something, and three weeks can be a lot to ask of the hosting team and means
you can't rotate with as many teams.

There are three styles of engagement with Ignite that we've found work well.

  * **Full engagement**: Whatever the team is doing, the Ignite engineers jump
    in and do it with them. This needs the least amount of up-front planning,
    but will require the most time and energy from the hosting team during the
    engagement, and will likely impact velocity during that time. This is
    especially well suited to teams that do party programming or heavy pairing,
    but is not well suited to teams under significant time pressure.
  * **Ticket based**: Before the engagement starts, the Ignite manager sits
    down with somebody from the hosting team (such as a manager, technical
    lead, or PM) and goes through their backlog looking for tickets that would
    be suitable for Ignite. They then tag those tickets with "Ignite", so
    they're easily searchable later. We try to have at least two tickets per
    ASE, plus one to use as an example, and one or two stretch tickets. During
    the engagement, we designate an "Ignite hero" from the hosting team who is
    available to answer questions and pair with folks from the team -- this can
    be a different person every day if there are a lot of folks interested.
    Similarly, we designate one ASE as the "shadow" each day, who will work
    with somebody on the hosting team instead of working on Ignite tickets.
    They can follow along with the team's on-call, if applicable, or pair with
    team members on whatever they're working on. The "shadow" should be a
    different person each day, to give everybody an opportunity to work with
    the team. This approach requires a medium amount of up-front prep and time
    investment from the hosting team, and is a good middle-of-the-road option.
    It's well suited to teams with a lot of high-value stuff in their backlog,
    or a lot of tickets that don't require too much special knowledge to work
    on. It can be made to work for almost any team, though.
  * **Project based**: Before the engagement starts, the Ignite manager sits
    down with somebody from the hosting team and specs out a project for the
    Ignite team to work on. This needs to be fairly limited in scope, since
    there will only be two weeks to work on it. It might involve spinning up a
    simple service, converting something old to match newer standards,
    upgrading a technology, or anything else suitable in scope. Once we have
    the specs, we break the project down into tickets. We try to make sure that
    the tickets are parallelizable, so more than one person/pair can be moving
    forward at the same time. Ideally, we try to have an MVP requirement that
    is very simple and can almost certainly be completed, and then a number of
    improvements and stretch goals to go further. That way, we can definitely
    get to an end point and say "We did the thing!", and we'll also be sure to
    have enough to work on to fill the entire two weeks.

Regardless of the particular style you go with for a given rotation, it's
important that the Ignite engineers get a chance to get their hands on the
keyboards and actually write some code (or whatever type of work that team
does). It's tempting sometimes to include them in group programming or pairing
sessions where they end up mostly just "along for the ride." While it is
possible to get some value from these sorts of sessions, it's generally much
less useful than actually doing the work themselves.

Teams' schedules often change, so you can't always plan rotations too far in
advance. We've found that planning rotations 1-2 months out works well. Use the
following criteria to choose teams to work with.

  * Try to include teams that work in different technical areas (front end,
    services, high throughput data, operations, internal tooling, etc).
  * Try to include teams with different working styles (campfire/party
    programming, mostly solo, pairing, mixed, etc).
  * Try to include teams that want different styles of engagements (full
    engagement, ticket based, project based).
  * Try to work with teams that are excited to work with Ignite and engage with
    the ASEs.
  * **Especially**, try to work with supportive teams who are well set up to
    take on an early career engineer and will likely have an opening for an
    Ignite engineer if it ends up being a good match.

## Social Events

Since we can't do full rotations with every team (there are over 70 as of this
writing!), we also have informal social meetings with various teams. Generally,
we aim for teams with some of the following qualities:

  * A team in a part of the company that isn't covered by a cohort's rotations
  * A team with a particularly interesting or central product/system they maintain
  * A team that might have openings coming up
  * A team that maintains fundamental tooling or infrastructure that many
    engineers are likely to interact with in the course of their work
  * A team somebody in the Ignite program has expressed a specific interest in
  * If the team is remote, and we weren't able to have a joint team lunch,
    we'll also do social events with the hosting team on a given rotation.

We've found it's good to schedule these 1-2 weeks in advance, and do one every
week or so. First, we contact the manager to make sure they're open to the
idea, and to find out if there are particular times or days to avoid (eg, maybe
lots of folks are on PTO one week, or the team has a regular WFH day). Once we
have the go-ahead from the manager, we create a calendar event and invite
everybody on both teams.

For in-person events, just going for a walk to a nearby coffee shop is a great
option. Let the team choose the destination, Ignite picks up the tab, and it's
also nice to use a punch card if the shop offers them, and then give it to
somebody on the team. For distributed events, you can offer a choice of options
ahead of time, which can be as simple as letting folks get their own coffee and
expense it, or there are many fancier options available, such as virtual escape
rooms, cooking classes, online games, and others.

During the event, the Ignite manager can seed some conversation about the team
and that part of the company with questions like, "What do you spend most of
your days doing?", "What's the next big thing your team is working on?", "Do
you have an on-call rotation? How does that usually go?", etc, but once
conversations are starting up and going on their own, there's no need to force
any particular topic.

## Presentations

Your company doubtless uses a variety of technologies, and has some local
experts on each of them. In addition, there are a lot of core skills that are
foundational to software engineering, regardless of the specific technologies
being used. Experts on these topics are an invaluable resource to a program
like Ignite, and we've found that many folks are excited and eager to share
their knowledge with others.

In Ignite, we keep a list of topics that would be valuable for new engineers at
New Relic to learn about, and local experts on those topics who are interested
in teaching. We try to front-load some foundational presentations early on, such as
reliability or how to work with broadly used internal infrastructure, and we
try to schedule classes around the time that those skills will be put into
practice. For example, if the upcoming team rotation involves a lot of kafka
work, that's a good time for a kafka class. We've found that about one class
per week is a good pace. We make the list of upcoming classes and topics
available to the Ignite engineers, and ask them for additional topics they'd
like classes on. Some of our best classes have been a result of requests from
folks in the program!

## Administrative Tasks and Scheduling

Here's the schedule we use to keep everything on track for an Ignite cohort in
the Team Rotation Phase.

### Every Day

  * Have a joint standup with the hosting team.
  * Make sure all Ignite engineers are clear on what they should be doing that
    day.
  * Set up a daily "Office Hours" zoom call for folks to optionally drop in for
    pairing, code review, answering questions and coaching, etc. This is where
    having a manager with recent technical skills is important, and has been
    called out by members of past Ignite cohorts as one of the most valuable
    aspects of the program.

### Every Week

  * Set up 1:1s and retro for the week.
  * Verify there's a class for the next two weeks (and arrange one if needed).
  * Verify there's a social event for the following week (and arrange one if needed).

### Every Rotation

  * First thing, have a joint kickoff meeting with the Ignite engineers and
    hosting team.  In this meeting, have the hosting team explain the systems
    they own, and then go over the plan for the rotation.
  * At the end of the rotation, have a joint celebration / retro. Go over what
    was accomplished, and discuss things to keep doing, stop doing, or adjust
    going forward.
  * Ensure you have the next three rotations scheduled.
  * Have a rotation planning meeting with the manager of your next rotation.
  * Schedule all the next rotation's meetings (kickoff, retro, standups, etc)
    and make sure the cohort is invited to everything they should be invited to
    for that rotation.

# Placement

This process is probably going to be very specific to each company, and may be
somewhat dependent on how headcount is handled by Finance or other departments,
so I won't try to provide a one-size-fits-all answer here. Talk with your
leadership about the options up front. Some possibilities include:

  * Assigning teams headcount that is specifically earmarked for folks who have
    come through your program.
  * Scheduling cohorts for specific durations, such that the cohort wraps up at
    the same time that a lot of appropriately leveled positions come open (if
    your company has a predictable schedule for such things).
  * Using a "pool" model instead of discrete cohorts, and hiring more engineers
    into the pool as others are placed on teams over time. This is the model we
    eventually moved to, and it's been working great for us.

However you decide to handle it, make sure you have all the details worked out
with Engineering leadership, Finance, and HR in the design phase of your
program, and that everybody is on board with the plan. The more flexibility
you're able to arrange for placements, the higher the likelihood of finding a
great team fit, which will lead to stronger, more motivated teams in the long
run.

## Assigning Technical Specialist Mentors

Once a specific team has been chosen for a given Ignite engineer, find a
technical specialist mentor for them. A technical specialist mentor is somebody
who specializes in the specific area the ASE will be going into on their new
team.  For example, an ASE joining a team related to data ingest might need a
mentor skilled in Java, Kafka, concurrency, and high throughput environments.
An ASE joining a frontend team might need a mentor with React, CSS, and GraphQL
experience. Consult your list of potential mentors, and find somebody on a team
working in a similar area, or that you know has those skills from prior
experience. Then, go through the same steps for assigning a generalist mentor
(check with the potential mentor's manager, then the potential mentor themself,
then make the introduction).

# Team Onboarding

The final phase of the Ignite program for an engineer is the Team Onboarding
phase. During this phase, ASEs will narrow in on the specific skills they'll
need to hit the ground running on their new team, and start learning the
processes and systems of the team in more detail.

## Team Onboarding Kickoff Meeting

Schedule a kickoff meeting with the ASE, the manager of their target team,
their technical specialist mentor, and optionally a tech lead or senior
engineer from the target team. Let everybody know that you'll be collecting
areas of study and specific study resources (books, conference talks, papers,
blog posts, etc) for the ASE, so they can be thinking about these or collecting
them ahead of time. At the kickoff, the goal is to create a personalized study
plan for the ASE.

You can start by creating a large list of all the topics, technologies, and
areas of knowledge that would be valuable to know on that team. Make sure to
emphasize that there's no expectation that the ASE will master all of this in
two weeks! Usually, these lists are comprehensive enough that by the time
somebody was well versed in every single topic on the list, they would probably
be a lead engineer. Instead, the purpose of this list is to outline the shape
of what the team works on and establish the topics that the new engineer should
be particularly keeping an eye out for. The, from the long list, pull out a
small number of specific things to look into for the next two weeks. These
might be things that are especially foundational to the team, or areas that the
team knows they'll be working on soon, and will depend somewhat on what the ASE
already knows well. For example, for an engineer joining a team that does high
throughput streaming data processing, the short list might just be Java
concurrency and the Flink framework - that's plenty to learn in two weeks!

The other thing you'll want to work out in this meeting are some working
agreements for the onboarding period. I've found that about a 50/50 split
between study time and working with the team has been effective, and pairing is
a particularly valuable exercise during this period (as opposed to just taking
tickets and working on them solo).

## Other Team Onboarding Considerations

Try to arrange for each ASE to go ahead and start sitting with their target
teams (if they're in person), and attending all of their meetings and such.
They're not officially on the team, yet, but you want to start integrating them
into the daily schedules and social fabric as much as possible.

Check in with the manager and the ASE about halfway through the Team Onboarding
period to see how things are going and whether there should be any adjustments
to the study plan at this point.

Make sure the target team has designated somebody to be available to answer any
questions the ASE may have if they're doing any solo work for the team.

It's also helpful to make a list of important stakeholders for the new engineer
to meet with - for example, folks like the team's PM, architect, QA, support
team, internal customers, and so on.

# After Placement

Once we get to this point, we have successfully placed the Associate Software
Engineer on their new long term team! But the work is not done yet.

## Handoff

There are a few things to do as the engineer transfers to their new team. At
New Relic, this is always accompanied by a promotion to Software Engineer 1 in
recognition of their new skills and knowledge of the company. We also supply a
packet of resources to the manager to help them with the specific needs of
managing an early career engineer.

## Check-ins

After the cohort has been placed, it's still important to check in with them
and see how things are going. This is an opportunity for informal feedback on
the Ignite process, and is a good time to provide any additional support that
the new engineer or their manager could use, such as help finding a new mentor
if their existing ones didn't work out, or finding opportunities for additional
training if there are particular areas to sharpen their skills. We like to
check in at two weeks, a month, and two months.

## Followup Surveys

In addition to the informal feedback from the check-ins, we collect more
formalized feedback in the form of surveys sent to the participants of the
program and their new managers. We typically wait a month to send these, so
that folks have had a chance to settle in a bit and get a feel for the new team
and how things are going, but the experience of joining is still fresh. In
addition to the usual sorts of questions ("Would you recommend this program to
a friend?", etc), we also ask about areas where additional training or ramp-up
would have been helpful, or things they wish they'd known before joining the
team. We then take this feedback and use it to iterate on the program design
for the next cohort.

## Reviews

Depending on when the engineer transfers to their new team in the review cycle,
there are a few different ways to handle this. If they join very near the
boundary of a cycle, then you can just have the Ignite manager conduct the
review for their time in Ignite, and the new team manager will have them for a
full review cycle and conduct the next one. If they joined more toward the
middle of the cycle, it may make more sense to conduct a joint review with both
managers.

# Reflect and Iterate

From time to time, make sure you open that document you started waaaay back
before the beginning of the cohort -- the very first thing this guide
recommended you do, in the "Take Notes" section up at the top. I like to do
this quarterly. Read through all those notes, and ponder the lessons to take
away.

  * Why did those things go well or poorly?
  * Are there things you can learn from the things that went well and apply elsewhere?
  * How can you improve or prevent the things that went poorly?
  * What ideas did you come up with along the way to tweak or change the program?

Constant improvement and iteration are key to long term success in any endeavor
like this. You aren't going to get everything perfect the first time. In fact,
you aren't going to get everything perfect, ever. That's ok. In fact, doing
better the next time is part of the fun, and refining a successful program to
be even more successful can be very satisfying.

# Conclusion

Of all the things I've worked on over the course of my career, both as an
engineer and as a manager, Ignite has easily been the most rewarding. But, it's
not just about personal fulfillment. This program has also bolstered the bench
strength of New Relic's engineering organization with a caliber of talent
that's impossible to consistently hire at other levels. Ignite is about
creating pathways into tech for underrepresented groups, yes, and also
addressing the inequities of the tech industry at large. But, it's also about
building your engineering teams for the future, looking down the road and
seeing the incredible value that these engineers will bring to your
organization for years to come. It's one of the rare cases where doing the best
thing for society lines up with doing the best thing for your company and the
bottom line. Choose whatever reasons are compelling for you. Personally,
there's nothing I'd rather be doing with my life.
